Karnataka 1st PUC Hindi Textbook Answers Sahitya Chapter 17 Breaks Stone
Breaking Stones Questions and Answers, Notes, Summary
I. Write a reply in a word or phrase or sentence:

Question 1.
Where did the woman break the stone?
Answer:
Nari used to break stones on the path of Allahabad.

Question 2.
What was the colour of the woman's body breaking stones?
Answer:
The colour of the woman's body was sanwala.

Question 3.
What
a woman repeatedly
answered: The woman repeatedly hit with a big hammer in her hand.

Question 4.
When was the woman breaking the stone?
Answer:
Nari was breaking stones in the sun of Dupahar.

Question 5.
What was leaking from the woman's forehead?
Answer:
Sweat was dripping from the woman's forehead.

Question 6.
Who are the poets of the ' breaking stone ' poem?
Answer:
Suryakant Tripathi, poet of 'Breaking Stone' poem, is 'wacky'.

Additional Questions:

Question 7.
What was going on on the road?
Answer:
There was a scorching heat on the road.

Question 8.
Whose side did the woman look like?
Answer:
Nari looked at the poet, then to the building.

Question 9.
Who woke up after a moment?
Answer:
After a moment, the stone-breaking woman trembled.

Question 10.
What was in the woman's hand?
Answer:
The woman had a hammer in her hand.

II. Write answers to the following questions:

Question 1.
Depict a stone-breaking woman on the path of Allahabad.
Answer:
On the path of Allahabad, the woman used to break stones. There was no shady tree where he could sit. Her body was sanwala, but she was in full puberty. The eyes were down and looked forward to the work. The big hammer was breaking the stone while striking for the hand.

Question 2.
Under what circumstances was the woman breaking the stone?
Answer:
A resourceless and helpless woman is sitting on the path of Allahabad and breaking stones. There is no shady tree around. The sunshine was climbing. There were summer days. The body was scorching. Hot air and dust were flying. It was the time of the two. In this situation, the woman was breaking the stone.

Question 3.
Write a summary of the poem ' Breaking Stone ' in your own words.
Answer:
In the poem 'Breaking Stones', Niraji depicts a labour woman breaking stones on a roadside in Allahabad. At the same time, a labour has made a realistic and poignant portrayal of the situation in which it was working. Like a woman cotton, she is breaking stones in the earth and in the double of the bursati lu. There is no shady tree around. Hot air and dust are flying. Here, the poet has expressed the importance of the hard work of the Sanwali Saloni poor labourer.

Additional Questions:

Question 4.
What does the poet say while expressing sympathy for the helpless woman who is a stone-breaking woman?
Answer:
Poets are filled with sympathy by looking at the sad situation of a stone-breaking woman. On the path of Allahabad, a woman was breaking stones in the Tapti Duphari. There was no shady tree where she was sitting. The heat was going on all around. Still, he was being worked out. The wacky Ji gets liquified by seeing his helpless situation.

III. Explain the context of the reference:

Question 1.
Guru Hammer hand,
repeated blows
– front Taru-Proprietor Attalika, Prakar.
Answer:
The post is taken from a poem titled 'Breaking Stones' of our textbook 'Sahitya Vaibhav', the creator of which Suryakant Tripathi is 'wacky'.
Reference: Wacky Ji is describing the situation of a woman breaking stones on the path of Allahabad.
Explanation: In the summer heat, wacky ji saw a woman breaking stones. He had a heavy hammer in his hand and he was repeatedly hurt on the stone. She was breaking the stone. There was no shady tree where she was sitting, but there was a huge building in front of her with trees in the rows. The wacky wants to say that the poor do not have happiness. Happiness is with rich people. They are resourceful. There is disparity in the society.
Special: Cinematographic progressive poetry. Sheds light on the meaning of the meaning. Using free verses.

Question 2.
The sunny
summer day
was the mother of the diva.
Raised Scorching
Heat
Answer: Theme: The title presented is taken from the poem 'Breaking Stone' of our textbook 'Sahitya Vaibhav'. Its creator Surya Kant Tripathi is 'wacky'.
Reference: On the path of Allahabad, the poet says about the hard work of a stone-breaking woman in the sun.
Explanation: In the scorching sun, the stone-breaking woman rejoices in her work dripping sweat. The poet's mind is unhappy at his compulsion, but he is respected by the patience and perseverance of the woman's work. Even in adversity, she was doing her job diligently.

Question 3.
I saw me
once i looked at that building, the chain.
No one
saw me in
the sense that I did not eat.
Answer:
The theme presented is from the poem 'Breaking Stone' of our textbook 'Sahitya Vaibhav'. Its creator Surya Kant Tripathi is 'wacky'.
Reference: The helpless condition of a poor labourer has been described by the poet in a simple but poignant manner that makes the minds of the readers liquified.
Explanation: The poet was observing the miserable condition of the labour. Only then did the mazerin see the poet looking at him. He took the vision and looked at the glorious huge building for a six. When he did not see anyone there, he looked at the poet with compulsion. His vision was as if a person was not afraid of constant exploitation. The exploitation had dried his tears.

Breaking Stone Poet Introduction:

Suryakant Tripathi 'Wacky' ji was born in 1896 AD at Medinipur, Mahishadal Nagar. Your mother died in the short-lived. The personality of the ' wacky ' became belligerent and struggling with the untimely demise of the wife and father, poverty and disdain. You passed away in 1961 AD.

Major compositions: 'Parimal', 'Geetika', 'Anamika', 'Archana', 'Aradhana', 'Kukurmutta', 'Ram Ki ShaktiPuja', 'Tulsidas', etc.
In the poetry of the wacky, there is a variety of text and craft. Your poetry depicts humanism, devotion, makeup and nature-related expressions. In the language of wacky Ji, there is an oz, there is flow, there is a kak and dignity.

The meaning of poetry:

The poem presented has a very live picture of a stone-breaking instrument and a helpless woman on the road. There is immense sympathy in the mind of the poet for the woman who works away from her home in the summer. On the one hand, the rich class is resting in high-quality attics and on the other hand, the victimised young woman is busy with painstaking work in the odd temperature of the mid-day. This progressive creation, which drew attention to the meaning of the meaning, has been compiled from the poetry collection ' Anamika ' of the wacky.

Breaking Stone Summary in Kannada

तोड़ती पत्थर Summary in English
In this poem, the poet Suryakant Tripathi “Nirala’ gives us an emotional portrayal of the troubles of a helpless stone-breaker and how she is devoid of any means or comforts.

The poet notices the labourer breaking stones one day on a street in Allahabad. There was no shady tree there below which she could sit and rest. She was dark-skinned but youthful. Her eyes were completely focused on the task of breaking stones.
With a heavy hammer in hand, she was raining blows on the stones. In front of her, there was a row of tall buildings and trees lining the street. It was the summer season. The day was getting hotter. The sun was beating down hard. A scorching wind was blowing. The earth was burning like a ball of cotton. Dust was flying everywhere. It was afternoon, yet she continued working and breaking the stones.

She saw the poet looking at her and immediately looked towards the building which was in front of her. When she found that there was no one there, she looked back at the poet. Even after looking at the poet looking at her, she did not feel embarrassed about her pitiable state. The strings of her heart which were not playing, the poet could still hear through his imagination as if it was a heavily decorated sitar. A droplet of sweat dripped from her forehead. After looking for a second in the other direction, she once again brought her focus back to her work.

तोड़ती पत्थर Summary in Hindi
1) वह तोड़ती पत्थर।
देखा उसे मैंने इलाहाबाद के पथ पर
वह तोड़ती पत्थर।
कोई न छायादार
पेड़ वह जिसके तले बैठी हुई स्वीकार,
श्याम तन, भर बँधा यौवन,
नत नयन, प्रिय कर्म रत मन।

लेखक ने एक मजदूरनी को इलाहाबाद के सड़क पर पत्थर तोड़ते देखा। वहाँ कोई छायादार . पेड़ भी न था, जिसके नीचे वह बैठती। वह साँवले रंग की थी, पर उसका यौवन भरा हुआ था। नीचे नेत्र किए वह पूरे मन से अपने काम में लगी हुई थी।

शब्दार्थ :
छायादार – धूप से रक्षण।

2) गुरु हथौड़ा हाथ,
करती बार-बार प्रहार –
सामने तरु-मालिका अट्टालिका, प्राकार।
चढ़ रही थी धूप
गर्मियों के दिन
दिवा का तमतमाता रूप।
उठी झुलसाती हुई लू
रुई ज्यों जलती हुई भू
गर्द चिनगी छा गई,
प्रायः हुई दुपहर
वह तोड़ती पत्थर।

भारी हथौड़ा हाथ में लिए हुए वह बार-बार चोटें मार रही थी। उसके सामने ऊँची-ऊँची इमारतें, अटारियाँ तथा वृक्षों की कतार थी। गर्मी के दिन थे। धूप चढ़ रही थी। सूर्य तमतमाया हुआ था। झुलसाने वाली लू चल रही थी। धरती रूई की तरह जल रही थी। धूल उड़ रही थी। दोपहर हो गई थी, पर वह पत्थर तोड़ रही थी।

शब्दार्थ :

गुरु – दक्ष;
प्रहार – मार;
अट्टालिका – अटारी, महल, पक्की इमारत;
भवन – महल;
तरु-मालिका – पेड़ों का कतार;
दिव – दिन;
तमतमाता धूप – बहुत गरमी धूप;
झुलसाती लू – अत्यंत गरम हवा;
रुई – cotton;
प्राकार – बड़ा भवन।
3) देखते देखा मुझे तो एक बार
उस भवन की ओर देखा, छिन्नतार।
देखकर कोई नहीं,
देखा मुझे उस दृष्टि से
जो मार खा रोई नहीं।
सजा सहज सितार,
सुनी मैंने वह नहीं जो थी सुनी झंकार।
एक क्षण के बाद वह काँपी सुघर,
ढुलक माथे से गिरे सीकर,
लीन होते कर्म में फिर ज्यों कहा –
‘मैं तोड़ती पत्थर।’

उसने मुझे अपनी ओर देखते हुए देखा, और तुरंत ही उसने अपने सामने वाले भवन की ओर देखा। देखा कि वहाँ कोई नहीं है फिर उसने मेरी ओर देखा। मुझे अपनी ओर देखते देखकर अपनी हीन दशा से वह संकुचित नहीं हुई। उसके हृदय में जो झंकार नहीं भी थी, वह मैंने सितार सजाकर अपनी कल्पना शक्ति से सुनी। उसके माथे से पसीने की बूंद गिर पड़ी। एक बार क्षण भर दूसरी ओर देखने के बाद वह फिर अपने काम में लग गई, जैसे वह कह रही हो, मैं पत्थर तोड़ रही हूँ।

शब्दार्थ :

छिन्न – कटा हुआ;
सीकर – पसीना;
प्रहार – आक्रमण, वार।